Report #1: Self and Home in the Coronavirus Age

For this report, I found myself increasingly engaged in the act of making during observation and reflection. Our readings influenced my conceptions of data, process, analysis, and making in a way that helped me push creative boundaries. In an overarching theme through this process, I’ve noticed an increased awareness of my microcosm and body-mind.

My observations and reflections on how the Coronavirus pandemic has impacted myself and home took the form of a bulleted table, photo collage, exercise of observation through senses, and a motion map of a typical day. These reflections relate to an awareness of my mind and body, increased attention to patterns, and changes in the physical space around me. I’ve been physically impacted by less movement but a healthier diet and mentally impacted by increased anxiety and decreased focus. I’ve been intentionally tracking patterns such as frequent temperature checks and tracking use of essential items. I notice progress in house projects that wouldn’t have taken place if we weren’t inhabiting our space differently.

This overall increased sense of awareness stems from the initial social resource scarcity panic that made it challenging to acquire goods that prompted me to begin tracking use of essential items. I tracked our household food intake to create a 2-week food store as recommended by the CDC. Additional CDC cleaning, hygiene, and self-screening recommendations brought me into a routine of tracking my temperature and making checklists to follow best practices. I’ve also become more observant as I’ve relied on mindfulness and active meditation to cope with stress and anxiety.

During this process I became cognizant of the way “observation and critique” were already feeding a “process of making” that Hunter et al makes point of in “Reifying the Maker as Humanist,” even if on a macro-scale. My initial impulse was to take notes on a digital document but I noticed the bullet and table format was inherently structuring my observation. I grew curious about ways I could document observations so I tracked our locations on the half-hour and mapped our paths of movement throughout the day. I decided to make a sensory-map to document what I was hearing, tasting, feeling, etc. I became more interested in the visual observations I made while walking around and decided to take photo documentation for further reference.

From our readings, an argument that resonated with me during this process was made by Stately in “On the “Maker Turn” in the Humanities” that humanists are engaged in the act of making even in written analysis even if it isn’t widely considered so. My reflections are arguably made objects in their own right.

—
Works Cited

Hunter, John, et al. “Reifying the Maker as Humanist.” Making Things and Drawing Boundaries. University of Minnesota Press, 2017.

Stately, David. “On the “Maker Turn” in the Humanities.” Making Things and Drawing Boundaries. University of Minnesota Press, 2017.

—
Terms of Use

Anti-copyright. The author of this work hereby waives all claim of copyright in this work and immediately places it in the public domain; it may be used, distorted or destroyed in any manner whatsoever without further attribution or notice to the creator.

—
Cite This Work

Durham, Ella. Fractal Studies in the Age of COVID-19, 24 Nov. 2020, edurham877.wordpress.com/.
 