Report #2: Comparative Analysis of Publishing Platforms

In this report, I’ll compare advantages and disadvantages of the platforms we explored focusing on metadata and touching on additional considerations for DH projects: creator ownership and control, entity ethics, accessibility, and making. I’ll explore effectiveness being dependent on purpose, assess UNL Campus Archeology, and give reason for WordPress.com or Omeka.net as my preference for this project.

Omeka.net’s use of Dublin Core standardizes metadata with a structure contributed to by a dedicated, experienced international community. However, there’s a learning curve to DCMI and it’s not as intuitive to the public as it is for established academics. Omeka.net includes a tagging system to aid navigability and plugins extending familiar metadata like geolocation and social bookmarking. In stark contrast, Blogger and Flickr have limited options for entering metadata. While Flickr allows for categorizing and clearly prompts for alt and image descriptions, Blogger’s only direct metadata entry is in post labels, date, and location. I find Flickr’s default settings to display EXIF data, including geolocation, disturbing. I appreciate that EXIF could be beneficial in certain applications but for privacy it should be opt-in, not opt-out. WordPress.com provides control and flexibility of metadata through a robust taxonomy system, but leaves many decisions around structure and schema open ended. With a paid WordPress.com service tier or self-hosted installation of WordPress, a plugin for standardized metadata systems such as Dublin Core could be installed.

These platforms are externally hosted and limit creator ownership but some offer more complete or easier data export. Both Blogger, owned by Google, and Flickr have proprietary codebases. Flickr emphasizes rights metatdata but has controversially removed content and trivialized individual rights in the past. Of all entities, I’m more trusting of the Corporation for Digital Scholarship as a not-for-profit rooted in the digital humanities. 
From a maker perspective, these platforms can either limit or open possibilities for experimentation. Flickr is most limited but Blogger and Omeka.net offer modest customizations in comparison to WordPress.com. 
With accessibility, Omeka.net’s default theme isn’t WCAG2.0 compliant and Omeka.net doesn’t clearly prompt for accessible alt text. Blogger’s formatting options often generate unsemantic HTML or improper document outlines. WordPress.com gives more creator control and accessibility cues that seemingly hold the most potential for web accessibility. Though accessibility in ease of use, server load, and multilingual support are further aspects to consider. 

This comparison only helps build a framework for determining platform effectiveness based on purpose and resources. Blogger is suited for linear storytelling, Flickr and Omeka.net both catalog and exhibit visual records and open opportunities for comparative analysis, WordPress.com is a catchall tool but founded in publishing. Omeka.net extends from cataloging and exhibiting, being adaptable for additional uses. DH projects should take a holistic consideration of each platform’s intended use, features, and ethics along with project intention and resources to determine effectiveness.

Omeka.net appears to be the right tool for UNL Campus Archeology assuming its purpose is cataloging and exhibiting items and its intended audience is academics. However, it’s less intuitive for a layperson. The metadata nested in titles isn’t meaningful without an existing understanding of the catalog system. The scale included in the photographs is useful but the handwritten notes are not. If included, they should be transcribed in text and linked to the image. Alt tags are non-descriptive and inaccessible. Standardizing recorded information helps comparison between items but doesn’t allow for creating content hierarchies unique to the item type. Additionally frustrating, some items include relation data but it’s not navigable or searchable. For example, Medicinal Bottle, 25LC86, #035, notes relation to #033 but it isn’t hyperlinked and a global search for #033 returns no results.

Assessing my intentions with this project, I’d lean toward using WordPress.com or Omeka.net. I have existing experience with WordPress, the possibilities for customization in structure and control over visual presentation give more creative control, and the built in taxonomy and metadata structures can be extended as needed. However, I’m also open to using Omeka.net because digital humanists are primarily considered for their audience, I’m more trusting of their ethics, and it’s traditionally suited for academic and scholarship work and audiences.

—
Terms of Use

Anti-copyright. The author of this work hereby waives all claim of copyright in this work and immediately places it in the public domain; it may be used, distorted or destroyed in any manner whatsoever without further attribution or notice to the creator.

—
Cite This Work

Durham, Ella. Fractal Studies in the Age of COVID-19, 24 Nov. 2020, edurham877.wordpress.com/.