Report #4: Neighbors and Neighborhood in the Coronavirus Age

During this report, I found myself analyzing processes as I was frustrated by incongruence in what was visually observable and what other data suggested. I had mistakenly worked out of order but carried an awareness of these intentionally linked exercises, both of which affected my field work and outcomes.

In misunderstanding Report #3, I set out to make visual observations of ‘neighbors and neighborhood’ prior to this report. At the smaller scale site of ‘my self and home,’ visual observation was effective but I found the restriction to fall short in conveying the impacts of the pandemic at the next scale. These restrictions resembled the airs of minimalism illustrated in Gil’s essay by Google’s front-facing minimalism in design that is powered by an immense and complex back-end processing. Being limited to visual evidence of impacts as the front-facing minimalism in design and the extensive mental and emotional labor in conveying the extent of tangible impacts with the leftovers of expunged visual evidence as the complex back-end processing.

My observations were inevitably shaped by my previous observations and process despite mis-ordering exercises intended to be modular and culminating to a larger work. I began inherently comparing the startling difference between the two sites. While there was ample visual evidence demonstrating a sustained awareness and practice of precautions at the small scale, most visual indicators of impacts on my neighbors and neighborhood had been nearly non-existent to what I remembered from the previous weeks and months.
The city signage of playground precautions was removed even though guidelines remained posted online. Only trace evidence of the growing houseless population existed even though it was highly visible in recent weeks.

At a neighborhood organization meeting, area agencies reported a recent, large increase in people seeking food assistance. The Lancaster County NE COVID-19 Dashboard showed an above average number of cases in my neighborhood. Undeniably, the pandemic is impacting those and the area around me but visual evidence has been reduced to signage enforcing directive measures at businesses, duplicated bus traffic supporting the university’s social distancing efforts, and PPE newly appearing among the usual litter. Certainly, there are others whose daily experience in their private spaces is incongruent with the larger scale. Frankly, the lack of visual evidence of the pandemic is unsettling and feels like a public gaslighting offensive.

Even mis-ordered, I already recognized an awareness of the unfolding cyclical and building progression of exercises was influencing my conceptual framework. My curiosities are drawn to the relationships between what echoes from a small scale out or from a large scale in. This awareness isn’t stifling my creativity in the process of critical observation, but it may be preventing me from broader or divergent reflections. It seems premature to evaluate if my field work is benefiting from this knowledge. In the context of Risam and Edwards’ essay, an awareness that these modular pieces can work together to create something larger could result in a successful resource without the barriers conventional practices may pose.

—
Works Cited

Risam, Roopika and Edwards, Susan. “Micro DH: Digital Humanities at the Small Scale.” DH (2017).

—
Terms of Use

Anti-copyright. The author of this work hereby waives all claim of copyright in this work and immediately places it in the public domain; it may be used, distorted or destroyed in any manner whatsoever without further attribution or notice to the creator.

—
Cite This Work

Durham, Ella. Fractal Studies in the Age of COVID-19, 24 Nov. 2020, edurham877.wordpress.com/.