Analog Visualizations

As explored in Report #5, the embodied act of drawing opened space for curiosity and deeper reflection once I was able to let go of preconceived notions of maps and self-imposed boundaries. Here, I detail this process and display individual pieces from my drawings.

Drawn Visualization 01 is the initial sketch I made after exploring digital visualization and visual narrative tools. I was initially frustrated by pen-to-paper but I started to question questioned my self-imposed limitations. As I expressed in Report #4, photo-documentation seemed to fall short in accurately depicting the effects of the Coronavirus at the larger scale of ‘neighbors and neighborhood.’ I challenged my inclination to literally reference the photographic evidence and wondered why I was carrying over a geo-spacial focus from the other toolsets if it didn’t seem significant to my reading. The first drawing started as a typical map as seen in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1 Drawn Visualization 01

As I started becoming more curious, I began adding context. I indicated the way this space is positioned between both campuses. I color coded sites that had visual evidence and sites that formerly had visual evidence. I traced some of my path, and started drawing in my memory of sites. However, I was drawn towards some of these ideas more abstractly and it was starting with a blank page which really created more exploration and possibility as illustrated by Fig. 2.

Fig. 2 Drawn Visualization 02

I began grouping data in different ways and contexts, grew curious about the relationship between visual evidence and setting, categorized visual evidence, and discovered a correlation between category and setting. As seen in Fig. 3, the setting where visual evidence was no longer present were all in public settings. Businesses have maintained visual evidence of the impacts of the Coronavirus pandemic in their signage of local directed health measures. Finally, newly evident impacts were related to the university and the increased bus traffic due to university routes doubling up on buses for social distancing purposes.

Fig. 3 Category Chart

I reflected on the timeline of the disappearance or appearance of visual evidence and noted that it corresponded with the start of the academic year. Fig. 4 brings these ideas together in an illustrated map progressing in time and by category.

Fig. 4 Memory, Time, and Category Illustrated Map

From there, I was interested to examine any possible patterns between the larger scale of ‘neighbors and neighborhood’ and the smaller scale of ‘my self and home. In Fig. 5, I thought about my home and how directly outside of my home are residential and public spaces, business districts not too far beyond, and the university campuses on nearby perimeters. Interestingly, following the same color progression found in Fig. 4. Digging further, I considered how the outside, or yard around my house, had less visible evidence than the inside of my house. Fig. 6 is a rough graph charting the increase in evidence from the outside, then inside, and finally to self. 

Fig. 5 Small Scale Visualization

Fig. 6 Small Scale Category Chart

The visual evidence I documented in Report #3 happened to correlate some with the categories of formerly visible, sustained visibility, and newly visible evidence. It was the practice of play and experimentation that pushed my reflections and analysis this direction. In this, I found analog visualization as offering the most discovery for my own research and, while these visualizations are not interactive, they still offer some possibility for viewer analysis and interpretations. 

—
Terms of Use

Anti-copyright. The author of this work hereby waives all claim of copyright in this work and immediately places it in the public domain; it may be used, distorted or destroyed in any manner whatsoever without further attribution or notice to the creator.

—
Cite This Work

Durham, Ella. Fractal Studies in the Age of COVID-19, 24 Nov. 2020, edurham877.wordpress.com/.
